Sigma (TryHackMe)

Overview
This room introduces Sigma, which is a generic rule format used in detection engineering. It helps SOC analysts create detection rules that can work across different SIEM tools.

Task 1: Introduction

Detection engineering is an important role for a SOC analyst. It involves creating rules that help detect threats before they cause damage to systems.

Sigma is used to write these detection rules in a standard format so they can be shared and reused across different platforms.

Task 2: What is Sigma

Sigma is an open source rule format used to detect suspicious activity in log data. It allows analysts to write detection rules once and use them across different SIEM tools.

It solves the problem of different tools using different query languages and makes it easier to share detection logic between analysts.

Sigma is similar to tools like Snort for network traffic and YARA for file detection.

Task 3: Sigma Rule Syntax

Sigma rules are written in YAML format.

YAML is case sensitive and uses spaces for indentation. Key value pairs are written using a colon and lists are written using a dash. Comments are written using the hash symbol.

Each Sigma rule has multiple fields.

Title defines what the rule detects.
ID is a unique identifier.
Status shows how mature the rule is, such as stable, test, or experimental.
Description explains what the rule is designed to detect.

Logsource defines where the logs come from. This includes the product such as Windows or Linux and the category such as process or firewall logs.

Detection is the most important part of the rule. It defines what activity to look for in logs.

Detection has two main components.

Search identifiers define what values or patterns to look for.
Condition expressions define how those values should be matched.

Two types of data structures are used.

Lists are used when matching any one value. This works like OR logic.
Maps are used when multiple conditions must be true. This works like AND logic.

Value modifiers help refine detection.

Contains checks if a value exists anywhere in a field.
Endswith checks if a value appears at the end.
Startswith checks if a value appears at the beginning.

Conditions define how detection rules behave. They can use AND, OR, and NOT logic to combine or filter results.

False positives refer to normal activity that might trigger alerts.
Level defines the severity of the alert such as low, medium, high, or critical.

Answers

Which status level could be noisy
experimental

Detection consists of
search identifiers

Data structures used
lists and maps

What I Learned

Sigma allows writing detection rules in a standard format.
It helps SOC analysts detect threats using log data.
Detection rules are built using patterns and conditions.
Understanding logs is essential for writing effective rules.



# Generic templete of a sigma rule file 

title: #Title of your rule
id: #Universally Unique Identifier (UUID) Generate one from https://www.uuidgenerator.net
status: #stage of your rule testing 
description: #Details about the detection intensions of the rule.
author: #Who wrote the rule.
date: #When was the rule written.
modified: #When was it updated
logsource:
  category: #Classification of the log data for detection
  product: #Source of the log data
detection:
  selection:
    FieldName1: Value #Search identifiers for the detection
    FieldName2: Value
  condition: selection #Action to be taken.
fields: #List of associated fields that are important for the detection

falsepositives: #Any possible false positives that could trigger the rule.

level: medium #Severity level of the detection rule.
tags: #Associated TTPs from MITRE ATT&CK
  - attack.credential_access #MITRE Tactic
  - attack.t1110 #MITRE Technique
